Drop-in ccrypt replacement for bournal
######################################

:legacy-link: 2010/6/Drop-in-ccrypt-replacement-for-bournal
:date: 2010-06-13 13:35
:tags: bash, encryption, desktop


| There's one great app - `bournal <http://becauseinter.net/bournal/>`_ ("when
  nobody cares what you have to say!"). Essentialy it's a bash script, providing
  a simple interface to edit and encrypt journal entries.
| Idea behind it is quite opposite of blogging - keep your thoughts as far away
  from everyone as possible. I've used the app for quite a while, ever since
  I've noticed it among freshmeat release announcements. It's useful to keep
  some thoughts or secrets (like keys or passwords) somewhere, aside from the
  head, even if you'd never read these again.

Anyway, encryption there is done by the means of `ccrypt utility
<http://ccrypt.sourceforge.net/>`_, which is sorta CLI for `openssl
<http://www.openssl.org/>`_. I don't get the rationale behind using it instead
of openssl directly (like "openssl enc ..."), and there are actually even better
options, like `gnupg <http://www.gnupg.org/>`_, which won't need a special logic
to keep separate stream-cipher password, like it's done in bournal.

| So today, as I needed bournal on exherbo laptop, I've faced the need to get
  ccrypt binary just for that purpose again. Worse yet, I have to recall and
  enter a password I've used there, and I don't actually need it to just encrypt
  an entry... as if assymetric encryption, gpg-agent, smartcards and all the
  other cool santa helpers don't exist yet.
| I've decided to hack up my "ccrypt" which will use all-too-familiar gpg and
  won't ask me for any passwords my agent or scd already know, and in an hour or
  so, I've succeeded.

| And `here goes <http://fraggod.net/oss/bin_scrz/ccrypt>`_ - ccrypt, relying
  only on "gpg -e -r $EMAIL" and "gpg -d". EMAIL should be in the env, btw.
| It actually works as ccencrypt, ccdecrypt, ccat as well, and can do recursive
  ops just like vanilla ccrypt, which is enough for bournal.
