Wheee, I've got a blog ;)
#########################

:date: 2010-01-30 21:06


There are times when even almighty google can't give a clear solution to some
simple-enough problem, and it seem to be happening more frequently so far, so I
thought I better write it all down somewhere, so here goes...

The idea formed quite a while ago, but I've always either dismissed it as
useless or was too lazy to implement it.

Not that it's any difficult to start a blog these days, but hosting it on some
major software platform like blogspot doesn't seem right to me, since I got too
used to be able to access the code and tweak anything I don't like (yes,
open-source has got me), and that should be pretty much impossible there.

| Other extreme is writing my own platform from scratch.
| Not a bad thought altogether, but too much of a wasted effort, especially
  since I don't really like web development, web design and associated voodoo
  rituals.
| Besides, it'd be too buggy anyway ;)

| So, I thought to get my hands on some simple and working out-of-the-box blog
  engine and fit it to my purposes as needed.

| Since don't like php, 95% of such engines were out of question.

| Surprisingly few platforms are written on py or lisp, and I wasn't fond of the
  idea of weaving separate cgi/fcgi module into my site.
| Although it wasn't much of a problem with twisted, since control over request
  handling there is absolute and expressed in simple py code, I've stumbled upon
  my long-neglected google-apps account and a `bloog
  <http://bloog.billkatz.com/>`_ project.

| Having played with gapps about two years ago, I really liked the idea: you get
  all the flexibility you want without having to care about things like db and
  some buggy api for it in the app, authorization and bot-protection, content
  serving mechanism, availability, even page generation, since google has django
  for it. In a nutshell I got a very simple representation layer between gdb and
  django, easy to bend in any way I want. As a bonus, bloog is not just simple
  and stupid tool, but quite nice and uniform restful api with YUI-based client.
| Two evenings of customization and I'm pretty happy with the result and
  completely familiar with the inner workings of the thing. Thanks to Bill Katz
  for sharing it.

All in all, it's an interesting experience. Blogosphere seem to have
evolved into some kind of sophisticated ecosystem, with it's own
platforms, resources, syndication rules, etc. While I'm pretty sure I
won't blend in, at least I can study it a bit.

| So ends the first entry. Quite more of it than I've expected, actually.
| More to come? I wonder.
