No IPSec on-a-stick for me ;(
#############################

:date: 2010-06-14 10:41
:tags: ipsec, unix, encryption


Guess being a long user of stuff like `OpenSSH <http://www.openssh.org/>`_,
`iproute2
<http://www.linuxfoundation.org/collaborate/workgroups/networking/iproute2>`_
and `VDE <http://vde.sourceforge.net/>`_ rots your brain - you start thinking
that building any sort of tunnel is a bliss. Well, it's not. At least not "any
sort".

| This day I've dedicated to set up some basic IPSec tunnel and at first that
  seemed an easy task - it's long ago in kernel (`kame <http://www.kame.net/>`_
  implementation, and it's not the only one for linux), native for IPv6 (which I
  use in a local network), has quite a lot of publicity (and guides), it's open
  (and is quite simple, even with IKE magic) and there are at least three major
  userspace implementations: `openswan <http://www.openswan.org/>`_,
  `ipsec-tools <http://ipsec-tools.sourceforge.net/>`_ (racoon, kame) and
  Isakmpd. Hell, it's even supported on Windows. What's more to ask for?
| Well, prehaps I made a bad decision starting with openswan and "native" kame
  NETKEY, but my experience wasn't quite a nice one.

I chose openswan because it looks like more extensive implementation than the
rest, and is supported by folks like Red Hat, plus it is fairly up to date and
looks constantly developed. Another cherry in it was apparent smartcard support
via `nss <http://www.mozilla.org/projects/security/pki/nss/>`_ now and `opensc
<http://www.opensc-project.org/>`_ in the past.

| First alarm bell should've been the fact that openswan actually doesn't
  compile without `quite extensive patching
  <http://bugs.gentoo.org/show_bug.cgi?id=301813#c8>`_.
| Latest version of it in ebuild form (which isn't quite enough for me anyway,
  since I use exheres these days) is 2.6.23. That's more than half a year old,
  and even that one is masked in gentoo due to apparent bugs and the ebuild is
  obviously blind-bumped from some previous version, since it doesn't take
  things like opensc->nss move (finalized in 2.6.23) into account.
| Okay, hacking my own ebuild and exheres for it was fun enough, at least I've
  got a firm grasp of what it's capable of, but seeing pure-Makefile build
  system and hard-coded paths in such a package was a bit unexpected. Took me
  some time to deal with include paths, then lib paths, then it turned out to
  had an `open bug <https://bugs.xelerance.com/issues/1112>`_ which prevents
  it's build on linux (wtf!?), and then it crashes on install phase due to some
  ever-crappy XML stuff.

| At least the docs are good enough (even though it's not easy to build them),
  so I set up an nss db, linked smartcard to it, and got a...  segfault? Right
  on ipsec showhostkey? Right, there's `this bug
  <http://www.mail-archive.com/debian-bugs-closed@lists.debian.org/msg282979.html>`_
  in 2.6.26, although in my case it's probably another one, since the patch
  doesn't fixes the problem. Great!
| Ok, gdb showed that it's something like get-nss-password failing (although it
  should be quite a generic interface, delegated from nss), even with
  nsspassword in place and nss itself working perfectly.

| Scratch that, simple nss-generated keys (not even certificates) as described
  in the `most basic tutorial
  <http://wiki.openswan.org/index.php/Openswan/Configure>`_, and now it's pluto
  daemon crashing with just a "Jun 14 15:40:25 daemon.err<27>
  ipsec__plutorun[-]: /usr/lib/ipsec/_plutorun: line 244: 6229 Aborted ..."
  line in syslog as soon as both ends off tunnel are up.
| Oh, and of course it messes up the connection between hosts in question, so it
  wouldn't be too easy to ssh between them and debug the problem.

Comparing to ssh or pretty much any tunneling I've encountered to this point,
it's still quite a remarkably epic fail. Guess I'll waste a bit more time on
this crap, since success seems so close, but it's quite amazing how crappy such
projects can still be these days. Of course, at least it's free, right?
