Terms of Service - Didn't Read
##############################

:legacy-link: 2012/9/Terms-of-Service-Didnt-Read
:date: 2012-09-16 19:32
:tags: policy, documentation, social


Right now I was working on python-skydrive module and further integration of `MS
SkyDrive <http://skydrive.live.com/>`_ into `tahoe-lafs
<http://tahoe-lafs.org/>`_ as a cloud backend, to keep the stuff you really care
about safe.

And even if you don't trust SkyDrive to keep stuff safe, you still have to
register your app with these guys, especially if it's an open module, because
"You are solely and entirely responsible for all uses of Live Connect occurring
under your Client ID." and it's unlikely that a generic python interface author
will vouch for all it's uses like that.

What do "register app" mean? Agreeing to `yet another "Terms of Service"
<http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-US/library/live/ff765012>`_, of course!

Do anyone ever reads these?

| What the hell "You may only use the Live SDK and Live Connect APIs to create
  software." sentence means there?
| Did you know that "You are solely and entirely responsible for all uses of
  Live Connect occurring under your Client ID." (and that's an app-id, given out
  to the app developers, not users)?
| How many more of such "interesting" stuff is there?

I hardly care enough to read, but `there's an app <http://tos-dr.info/>`_ for
exactly that, and it's relatively well-known by now.

| What might be not as well-known, is that there's now a `campaign on IndieGoGo
  <http://www.indiegogo.com/terms-of-service-didnt-read>`_ to keep the thing
  alive and make it better.
| Please consider supporting the movement in any way, even just by spreading the
  word, right now, it's really one of the areas where filtering-out of all the
  legalese crap and noise is badly needed.

http://www.indiegogo.com/terms-of-service-didnt-read
