On github as well now
#####################

:date: 2012-02-03 20:57
:tags: scm, web, social


Following another hiatus from a day job, I finally have enough spare time to
read some of the internets and do something about them.

| For quite a while I had lots of quite small scripts and projects, which I
  kinda documented here (and on the site pages before that).
| I always kept them in some kind of scm - be it system-wide repo for
  configuration files, ~/.cFG repo for DE and misc user configuration and ~/bin
  scripts, or ~/hatch repo I keep for misc stuff, but as their number grows, as
  well as the size and complexity, I think maybe some of this stuff deserves
  some kind of repo, maybe attention, and best-case scenario, will even be
  useful to someone but me.

So I thought to gradually push all this stuff out to github and/or bitbucket
(still need to learn or at least look at hg for that!).  github being the most
obvious and easiest choice, just created a few repos there and started the
migration. More to come.

| Still don't really trust a silo like github to keep anything reliably (besides
  it lags like hell here, especially compared to local servers I'm kinda used
  to), so need to devise some mirroring scheme asap.
| Initial idea is to take some flexible tool (hg seem to be ideal, being python
  and scm proper) and build a hooks into local repos to push stuff out to
  mirrors from there, ideally both bitbucket and github, also exploiting their
  metadata APIs to fetch stuff like tickets/issues and commit history of these
  into separate repo branch as well.

Effort should be somewhat justified by the fact that such repos will be
geo-distributed backups, shareable links and I can learn more SCM internals by
the way.

For now - `me on github <https://github.com/mk-fg/>`_.
