Late adventures with time-series data collection and representation
###################################################################

:date: 2012-02-28 09:16
:tags: monitoring, sysadmin, notification, python, unix


When something is wrong and you look at the system, most often you'll see
that... well, it works. There's some cpu, disk, ram usage, some number of
requests per second on different services, some stuff piling up, something in
short supply here and there...

And there's just no way of telling what's wrong without answers to the questions
like "so, what's the usual load average here?", "is the disk always loaded with
requests 80% of time?", "is it much more requests than usual?", etc, otherwise
you might be off to some wild chase just to find out that load has always been
that high, or solve the mystery of some unoptimized code that's been there for
ages, without doing anything about the problem in question.

Historical data is the answer, and having used `rrdtool
<http://oss.oetiker.ch/rrdtool/>`_ with stuff like (customized) `cacti
<http://www.cacti.net/>`_ and `snmpd <http://www.net-snmp.org/>`_ (with `some my
hacks <http://snmpd-pyagentx.sf.net/>`_ on top) in the past, I was overjoyed
when I stumbled upon a `graphite project
<http://graphite.readthedocs.org/en/latest/>`_ at some point.

| From then on, I strived to collect as much metrics as possible, to be able to
  look at history of anything I want (and lots of values can be a reasonable
  symptom for the actual problem), without any kind of limitations.
| carbon-cache does magic by batching writes and carbon-aggregator does a great
  job at relieving you of having to push aggregate metrics along with a granular
  ones or sum all these on graphs.

Initially, I started using it with just `collectd <http://collectd.org/>`_ (and
still using it), but there's a need for something to convert metric names to a
graphite hierarcy.

After looking over quite a few solutions to collecd-carbon bridge, decided to
use `bucky <https://github.com/cloudant/bucky>`_, with `a few fixes of my own
<https://github.com/mk-fg/bucky>`_ and `quite large translation config
<http://fraggod.net/static/code/bucky_conf.py>`_.

| Bucky can work anywhere, just receiving data from collectd network plugin,
  understands collectd types and properly translates counter increments to N/s
  rates. It also includes `statsd daemon <https://github.com/etsy/statsd>`_,
  which is brilliant at handling data from non-collector daemons and scripts and
  more powerful `metricsd <https://github.com/kpumuk/metricsd>`_ implementation.
| Downside is that it's only maintained in forks, has bugs in less-used code
  (like metricsd), quite resource-hungry (but can be easily scaled-out) and
  there's kinda-official `collectd-carbon plugin
  <http://collectd.org/wiki/index.php/Plugin:Carbon>`_ now (although I found it
  buggy as well, not to mention much less featureful, but hopefully that'll be
  addressed in future collectd versions).

Some of the problems I've noticed with such collectd setup:

-  Disk I/O metrics are godawful or just doesn't work - collected
   metrics of read/write either for processes of device are either
   zeroes, have weird values detached from reality (judging by actual
   problems and tools like `atop <http://www.atoptool.nl/>`_ and
   `sysstat <http://sebastien.godard.pagesperso-orange.fr/>`_ provide)
   or just useless.
-  Lots of metrics for network and memory (vmem, slab) and from various
   plugins have naming, inconsistent with linux /proc or documentation
   names.
-  Some useful metrics that are in, say, sysstat doesn't seem to work
   with collectd, like sensor data, nfsv4, some paging and socket
   counters.
-  Some metrics need non-trivial post-processing to be useful - disk
   utilization % time is one good example.
-  Python plugins leak memory on every returned value. Some plugins
   (ping, for example) make collectd segfault several times a day.
-  One of the most useful info is the metrics from per-service cgroup
   hierarchies, created by
   `systemd <http://www.freedesktop.org/wiki/Software/systemd>`_ - there
   you can compare resource usage of various user-space components,
   totally pinpointing exactly what caused the spikes on all the other
   graphs at some time.
-  Second most useful info by far is produced from logs and while
   collectd has a damn powerful `tail
   plugin <http://collectd.org/wiki/index.php/Plugin:Tail>`_, I still
   found it to be too limited or just too complicated to use, while
   simple log-tailing code does the better job and is actually simplier
   due to more powerful language than collectd configuration. Same
   problem with `table
   plugin <http://collectd.org/wiki/index.php/Plugin:Table>`_ and /proc.
-  There's still a need for lagre post-processing chunk of code and
   pushing the values to carbon.

| Of course, I wanted to add systemd cgroup metrics, some log values and missing
  (and just properly-named) /proc tables data, and initially I wrote a collectd
  plugin for that.  It worked, leaked memory, occasionally crashed (with
  collectd itself), used some custom data types, had to have some metric-name
  post-processing code chunk in bucky...
| Um, what the hell for, when sending metric value directly takes just "echo
  some.metric.name $val $(printf %(%s)T -1) >/dev/tcp/carbon\_host/2003"?

So off with collectd for all the custom metrics.

Wrote `a simple "while True: collect_and_send() && sleep(till_deadline);" loop
<http://fraggod.net/static/code/harvestd.py>`_ in python, along with the cgroup
data collectors (there are even proper "block io" and "syscall io" per-service
values!), log tailer and `sysstat data processor
<http://fraggod.net/static/code/sa_carbon.py>`_ (mainly for disk and network
metrics which have batshit-crazy values in collectd plugins).

| Another interesting data-collection alternative I've explored recently is
  `ganglia <http://ganglia.info>`_.
| Redundant gmond collectors and aggregators, communicating efficiently over
  multicast are nice. It has support for python plugins, and is very easy to
  use - pulling data from gmond node network can be done with one telnet or nc
  command, and it's fairly comprehensible xml, not some binary protocol. Another
  nice feature is that it can re-publish values only on some significant changes
  (where you define what "significant" is), thus probably eliminating traffic
  for 90% of "still 0" updates.

| But as I found out while trying to use it as a collectd replacement
  (forwarding data to graphite through amqp via `custom scripts
  <https://github.com/mk-fg/gmond-amqp-graphite>`_), there's a fatal flaw -
  gmond plugins can't handle dynamic number of values, so writing a plugin that
  collects metrics from systemd services' cgroups without knowing how many of
  these will be started in advance is just impossible.
| Also it has no concept for timestamps of values - it only has "current" ones,
  making plugins like "sysstat data parser" impossible to implement as well.
| collectd, in contrast, has no constraint on how many values plugin returns and
  has timestamps, but with limitations on how far backwards they are.

Pity, gmond looked like a nice, solid and resilent thing otherwise.

I still like the idea to pipe graphite metrics through AMQP (like `rocksteady
<http://code.google.com/p/rocksteady/>`_ does), routing them there not only to
graphite, but also to some proper threshold-monitoring daemon like `shinken
<http://www.shinken-monitoring.org>`_ (basically `nagios
<http://www.nagios.org/>`_, but distributed and more powerful), with alerts,
escalations, trending and flapping detection, etc, but most of the `existing
solutions
<http://www.protocolostomy.com/2012/02/24/sending-alerts-with-graphite-graphs-from-nagios/>`_
all seem to use graphite and whisper directly, which seem kinda wasteful.

Looking forward, I'm actually deciding between replacing collectd completely for
a few most basic metrics it now collects, pulling them from sysstat or just
/proc directly or maybe integrating my collectors back into collectd as plugins,
extending collectd-carbon as needed and using collectd threshold monitoring and
matches/filters to generate and export events to nagios/shinken... somehow first
option seem to be more effort-effective, even in the long run, but then maybe I
should just work more with collectd upstream, not hack around it.
