Raspberry Pi early boot splash / logo screen
############################################

:date: 2015-11-28 23:19
:tags: linux, systemd, arm, go


Imagine you have RPi with some target app (e.g. kiosk-mode browser) starting in
X session, and want to have a full-screen splash for the whole time that device
will be booting, and no console output or getty's of any kind, and no other
splash screens in there - only black screen to logo to target app.

In case of average Raspberry Pi boot, there is:


- A firmware "color test" splash when device gets powered-on.

  Removed with ``disable_splash=1`` in /boot/config.txt.


- "Rainbow-colored square" over-current indicator popping up on the right,
  regardless of PSU or cables, it seems.

  ``avoid_warnings=1`` in the same config.txt


- As kernel boots - Raspberry Pi logo embedded in it.

  ``logo.nologo`` to /boot/cmdline.txt.

  Replacing that logo with proper splash screen is not really an option, as
  logos that work there have to be tiny - like 80x80 pixels tiny.

  Anything larger than that gives ``fbcon_init: disable boot-logo (boot-logo
  bigger than screen)``, so in-kernel logo isn't that useful, and it's a pain to
  embed it there anyway (kernel rebuild!).


- Lots of console output - from kernel and init both.

  cmdline.txt: ``console=null quiet``


- Getty showing its login prompt.

  ``systemctl disable getty@tty1``


- More printk stuff, as various kernel modules get initialized and hardware
  detected.

  ``console=null`` in cmdline.txt should've removed all that.

  ``loglevel=1 rootfstype=ext4`` helps if ``console=null`` is not an option for
  whatever reason.

  Need for "rootfstype" is kinda funny, because messages from kernel trying to
  mount rootfs as ext2/ext3 seem to be emergency-level or something.


- Removing all the stuff above should (finally!) get a peaceful black screen,
  but what about the actual splash image?

  ::

    fbi -d /dev/fb0 --once --noverbose\
      --autozoom /path/to/image.png </dev/tty1 >/dev/tty1

  Or, in early-boot-systemd terms:

  .. code-block:: ini

    [Unit]
    DefaultDependencies=no
    After=local-fs.target

    [Service]
    StandardInput=tty
    StandardOutput=tty
    ExecStart=/usr/bin/fbi -d /dev/fb0\
      --once --noverbose --autozoom /path/to/image.png

    [Install]
    WantedBy=sysinit.target

  "fbi" is a tool from fbida_ project.

  First time you run it, you'll probably get::

    ioctl VT_GETSTATE: Inappropriate ioctl for device (not a linux console?)

  A lot of people on the internets seem to suggest something like "just run it
  from Alt + F1 console", which definitely isn't an option for this case, but
  I/O redirection to /dev/tty (as shown above) seem to work.


- Blank black screen on X startup.

  Running X on a different VT from "fbi" seem to have nice effect that if X will
  have to be restarted for some reason (e.g. whole user session gets restarted
  due to target app's watchdog + StartLimitAction=), VT will switch back to a
  nice logo, not some text console.

  To fix blackness in X before-and-after WM, there're tools like feh_::

    feh --bg-scale /path/to/image.png

  That's not instant though, as X usually takes its time starting up, so see
  more on it below.


- Target app startup cruft - e.g. browser window without anything loaded yet, or
  worse - something like window elements being drawn.

  * There can be some WM tricks to avoid showing unprepared window, including
    "start minimized, then maximize", switching "virtual desktops", overlay
    windows, transparency with compositors, etc.

    Depends heavily on WM, obviously, and needs one that can be controlled from
    the script (which is rather common among modern standalone WMs).

  * Another trick is to start whole X without switching VT -
    i.e. ``X -novtswitch vt2`` - and switch to that VT later when both X and app
    signal that they're ready, or just been given enough time.

    Until switch happens, splash logo is displayed, courtesy of "fbi" tool.

  * On Raspberry Pi in particular, there're some direct-to-display `VideoCore
    APIs`_, which allow to overlay anything on top of whatever Linux or X draw
    in their VTs while starting-up.

    This is actually a cool thing - e.g. starting ``omxplayer --no-osd --no-keys
    /path/to/image.png.mp4`` (mp4 produced from still image) early on boot (it
    doesn't need X or anything!) will remove the need for most previous steps,
    as it will eclipse all the other video output.

    "omxplayer" maybe isn't the best tool for the job, as it's not really meant
    to display still images, but it's fast and liteweight enough.

    Better alternative I've found is to use OpenVG API via `openvg lib`_, which
    has nice Go (golang) version, and wrote an `overlay-image.go`_ tool to
    utilize it for this simple "display image and hang forever" (to be stopped
    when boot finishes) purpose.

    Aforementioned Go tool has "-resize" flag to scale the image to current
    display size with "convert" and cache it with ".cache-WxH" suffix, and
    "-bg-color" option to set margins' color otherwise (for e.g. logo centered
    with solid color around it).
    Can be built (be sure to set $GOPATH first) with: ``go get
    github.com/ajstarks/openvg && go build .``


- Finally some destination state with target app showing what it's supposed to.

  Yay, we got here!


Not a very comprehensive or coherent guide, but might be useful to sweep all the
RPi nasties under an exquisite and colorful rug ;)


**Update 2015-11-30:** Added link to `overlay-image.go`_ tool.


.. _fbida: http://www.kraxel.org/blog/linux/fbida/
.. _feh: http://feh.finalrewind.org/
.. _VideoCore APIs: http://elinux.org/Raspberry_Pi_VideoCore_APIs
.. _openvg lib: https://github.com/ajstarks/openvg/
.. _overlay-image.go: |filename|misc/overlay-image.go
