Information as a disaggregated buffet instead of firehose or a trough
#####################################################################

:date: 2022-11-25 22:37
:tags: social, syndication, web


Following information sources on the internet has long been compared to
"drinking from a firehose", and trying to "keep up" with that is
how I think people end up with hundreds of tabs in some kind of backlog,
overflowing inboxes, feeds, podcast queues, and feeling overwhelmed in general.

Main problem for me with that (I think) was aggregation - I've used
`web-based feed reader`_ in the past, aggregated feeds from
slashdot/reddit/hn/lobsters (at different times), and followed
"influencers" on twitter to get personally-curated feeds from there
in one bundle - and it never really worked well.

For example, even when following podcast feeds, you end up with a backlog
(of things to listen to) that is hard to catch-up with - natually -
but it also adds increasingly more tracking and balancing issues,
as simply picking things in order will prioritize high-volume stuff,
and sometimes you'll want to skip the queue and now track "exceptions",
while "no-brainer" pick pulls increasingly-old and irrelevant items first.

Same thing tends to happen with any bundle of feeds that you try to "follow",
which always ends up being overcrowded in my experience, and while you can
"declare bankrupcy" resetting the follow-cursor to "now", skipping backlog,
that doesn't fix fundamental issue with this "following" model -
you'll just fall behind again, likely almost immediately - the approach itself
is wrong/broken/misguided.

Obvious "fix" might be to curate feeds better so that you can catch-up,
but if your interests are broad enough and changing, that's rarely an option,
as sources tend to have their own "take it or leave it" flow rate,
and narrowing scope to only a selection that you can fully follow is silly,
esp. if some of them are inconsistent or drown out others, even while being
low-noise.

Easy workable approach, that seem to avoid all issues that I know of, for me,
seem to go something like this:

- Bookmark all sources you find interesting individually.

- When you want some podcast to listen-to, catch-up on news in some area,
  or just an interesting thing to read idly - remember it - as in
  "oh, would be nice to read/know-about/listen-to this right now".

- Then pull-out a bookmark, and pick whatever is interesting and
  most relevant there, not necessarily latest or "next" item in any way.

This removes the mental burden of tracking and curating these sources,
balancing high-traffic with more rarefied ones, re-weighting stuff according
to your current interests, etc - and you don't loose on anything either!

I.e. with something relevant to my current interests I'll remember to go back to
for every update, but stuff that is getting noisy or falling off from that sphere,
or just no longer entertaining or memorable, will naturally slip my mind more
and more often, and eventually bookmark itself can be dropped as unused.

Things that I was kinda afraid-of with such model before -
and what various rss apps or twitter follows "help" so well to track:

- Will forget where/how to find important info sources.
- Forget to return to them.
- Miss out on some stuff there.
- Work/overhead of re-checking for updates is significant.

None of these seem to be an issue in practice, and most interesting and relevant
stuff will natually be the first thing I'll remember to check/grab/read,
you don't really "miss out" on anything when time is more limited than amount of
interesting goodies (i.e. it's a problem of what to miss-out on, not whether you
do or don't), and time spent checking couple bookmarks is actually a rounding
error compared to processing the actual information (there's always a lot of new
stuff, and for something you check obsessively, you'd know the rate well).

This kind of "disaggregated buffet" way of zero-effort "controlling" information
intake is surprisingly simple, pretty much automatic (happens on its own),
very liberating (no backlog anywhere), and can be easily applied to different
content types:

- Don't get podcast rss-tracking app, bookmark individual sites/feeds instead.

  I store RSS/Atom feed URLs under one bookmarks-dir in Waterfox, and when
  wanting for something to listen on a walk or while doing something monotonous,
  remember and pull out an URL via quickbar (bookmarks can be searched via
  ``* <query>`` there iirc, but I have completion for only these enabled anyway),
  run rss-get_ script on the link, pick specific items/ranges/links to
  download via its aria2c_ or yt-dlp_ (with its built-in SponsorBlock_), play that.

- Don't "follow" people/feeds/projects on twitter or fediverse/mastodon
  and then read through composite timeline, just bookmark all individual feeds
  (on whatever home instances or via nitter_) instead.

  This has a great added advantage of maintaining context in these platforms
  which are notoriously bad for that, i.e. you read through things as they're
  posted in order, not interleaved with all other stuff, or split over time.

  Also this doesn't require an account, running a fediverse instance,
  giving away your list of follows (aka social graph), or having your [current]
  interests being tracked anywhere (even if "only" for bamboozling you with ads
  on the subject to death).

  With many accounts to follow and during some temporary twitter/fediverse
  duplication, I've also found it useful (so far) to have a simple `ff-cli script`_
  to "open N bookmarks matching /@", when really bored, and quickly catch-up on
  something random, yet interesting enough to end up being bookmarked.

- Don't get locked into subscribing or following "news" media that is kinda shit.

  Simply not having that crap bundled with other things in same
  reader/timeline/stream/etc will quickly make brain filter-out and "forget"
  sources that become full of ads, <emotion>bait, political propaganda
  and various other garbage, and brain will do such filtering all in the
  background on its own, without wasting any time or conscious cycles.

  There's usually nothing of importance to miss with such sources really,
  as it's more like taking a read on the current weather,
  only occasionally interesting/useful, and only for current/recent stuff.

It's obviously not a guide, and maybe only works well for me this way, but as
I've kinda-explained it (poorly) in chats before, might as well write it down
here - hopefully somewhat more coherently - and just link to later.


.. _web-based feed reader: https://github.com/mk-fg/feedjack
.. _rss-get: https://github.com/mk-fg/fgtk#rss-get
.. _aria2c: https://aria2.github.io/
.. _yt-dlp: https://github.com/yt-dlp/yt-dlp
.. _SponsorBlock: https://sponsor.ajay.app/
.. _nitter: https://github.com/zedeus/nitter/wiki/Instances
.. _ff-cli script: https://github.com/mk-fg/fgtk#ff-cli
