Algorithm for N exponentially-spaced retries within timeout T
#############################################################

:date: 2025-09-15 14:14
:tags: python, rate-limiting


When retrying some failed check or operation, common ways to algorithmically
wait for next attempt seem to be:

- Make N retries with a static interval in-between, e.g. "retry every 10s".

  Works well when it's not a problem to retry too often, or need to know when
  stuff starts working again ASAP (like within 10s), and when expected downtime
  is predictable (something like minutes with 10s retries, not <1s or days/months).

- Use exponential backoff to avoid having to predict availability/downtime.

  Idea is to multiply interval each time, so it can start with 1s and rises up
  quickly as exponential curve does, reacting well to both quick outages and
  at the same time not still retrying needlessly every 10s after days.

- Exponential backoff can quickly get out of hand, so cap its max interval.

  Good tweak to set how-late-at-most working state will be detected again.

But vast majority of use-cases for retries I have seem to also need "give up
after some time" limit, so for example a tool fetching a file, will fail with
an error in a few minutes, which I can detect and see if it can be fixed in some
other way than just retrying endlessly (as in give router a kick or something).

That timeout usually seems like the most important part to set for me - i.e.
"I expect this to finish within 20m, so keep checking and process results when
available".

And above algortithms don't work too well under this constraint:

- Fixed-interval attempts can be spaced evenly within timeout, but that's
  usually suboptimal for same reasons as already mentioned - couple quick
  initial attempts/retries are often more useful, and there's no point trying
  too often after a while.

- People - me included - are notoriously bad at understanding exponentials,
  so it's nigh-impossible to tell with any exponential delay how many attempts
  it'd imply within known timeout.

  That is, depending on exact formula, could be that intervals will go up past
  half of the timeout span fast and become effectively useless, not trying enough,
  or otherwise make too many needless attempts throughout when timeout is known
  to be quite long.

Long-time solution I had for this rate-limiting use-case is to not pick
exponential function effectively "at random" or "by intuition" (which again seems
difficult to get right), but instead use a simple chunk of code to calculate it.

Idea is to be able to say "I want 20 more-and-more delayed retries within 15m"
or "make 100 attempts in 1h" and not worry about further details, where backoff
function constants will be auto-picked to space them out nicely within that interval.

Specific function I've used in dozens of scripts where such "time-capped retries"
are needed goes something like this:

.. code-block:: python

  def retries_within_timeout( tries, timeout,
      backoff_func=lambda e,n: ((e**n-1)/e), slack=0.01 ):
    'Return list of delays to make exactly n retries within timeout'
    a, b = 1, timeout
    while True:
      m = (a + b) / 2
      delays = list(backoff_func(m, n) for n in range(tries))
      if abs(error := sum(delays) - timeout) < slack: return delays
      elif error > 0: b = m
      else: a = m

Sometimes with adjusted backoff_func or slack value, depending on specific use.

For e.g. "10 retries within 60s timeout" it'd return a list with delays like this::

  0.0, 0.3, 0.8, 1.5, 2.5, 4.0, 6.2, 9.4, 14.2, 21.1

I.e. retry immediately, then wait 0.3s, then 0.8s, and up to 14s or 21s towards
the end, when it's more obviously not a thing that's fixable by a quick retry.

As all these will sum up to 60s (with just ±0.01s slack), they can be easily
plugged into a for-loop like this:

.. code-block:: python

  for delay in retries_within_timeout(10, 60):
    time.sleep(delay)
    if everything_works(): break
  else: raise TimeoutError('Stuff failed to work within 60s')

Without then needing any extra timeout checks or a wrapper to stop the loop after,
hence also quite convenient and expressive language abstraction imo.

There's probably an analytic solution for this, to have exact formulas for
calculating coefficients for backoff_func, that'd produce a set of N delays to
fit precisely within timeout, but I've never been interested enough to find
one when it's trivial to find "close enough" values algorithmically via bisection,
like that function does.

Also usually there's no need to calculate such delays often, as they're either
static or pre-configured, or used on uncommon error-handling code-paths, so having
a heavier solution-bruteforcing algorithm isn't an issue.

Not sure why, but don't think I've bumped into this kind of "attempts within timeout"
configuration/abstractions anywhere, so might be a quirk of how I think of rate-limits
in my head, or maybe it's just rarely considered to be worth adding 10 lines of code over.

Still, seem to make much more intuitive sense to me than other common limits above.

----------

Recently I've also wanted to introduce a min-delay constraint there, which ideally
will discard those initial short-delay values in the example list above, and pick ones
more to the right, i.e. won't just start with delay_min + 0.0, 0.3, 0.8, ... values.

This proved somewhat error-prone for such bruteforce algorithm, because often
there's simply no curve that fits neatly within narrow-enough min-max range of
values that all sum up to specified timeout, so had to make algo a bit more complicated:

.. code-block:: python

  def retries_within_timeout(tries, timeout, delay_min=0, slack=None, e=10):
    'Return list of delays to make exactly n retries within timeout'
    if tries * delay_min * 1.1 > timeout: raise ValueError('tries * delay_min ~> timeout')
    if tries == 1: return [max(delay_min, timeout / 2)]
    # delay_calc is picked to produce roughly [0, m] range with n=[1, tries] inputs
    delay_calc = lambda m,n,_d=e**(1/tries-1): m * (e ** (n / tries - 1) - _d)
    a, b = 0, delay_min + timeout * 1.1
    if not slack: slack = max(0.5 * delay_min, 0.1 * (timeout / tries))
    try:
      for bisect_step in range(50):
        n, m, delays = 0, (a + b) / 2, list()
        while len(delays) < tries:
          if (td := delay_calc(m, n := n + 1)) < delay_min: continue
          delays.append(td)
        if a == b or abs(error := sum(delays) - timeout) < slack: return delays
        elif error > 0: b = m
        else: a = m
    except OverflowError: pass # [tries*delay_min, timeout] range can be too narrow
    if not delay_min: slack *= 2
    return list( (delay_min+td) for td in
      retries_within_timeout(tries, timeout - delay_min*(tries-1), slack=slack, e=e) )

(all this is a lot less confusing when graphed, either as values from delay_calc
or sum-of-delays-up-to-N, which can be easy to do with `a bit of HTML/JS`_)

As per comment in the code, delay_calc is hardcoded to produce predictable output
range for known "attempt number" inputs, and a couple pathological-case checks
are needed to avoid asking for impossible values (like "fit 10 retries in 10s
with min 3s intervals" so 10*3 = 30s within 10s) or impossible quadratic curve shapes
(for which there're couple fallbacks at the end).

Default ``e=10`` exponent base value makes delays more evenly-spaced,
which get more samey with lower e-values or rise more sharply with higher ones,
e.g. ``e=1000`` will change result like this::

  retries_within_timeout(10, 60, e=10)  : 0.0, 0.6, 1.4, 2.4, 3.6, 5.2, 7.2, 9.6, 12.8, 16.7
  retries_within_timeout(10, 60, e=1000): 0.0, 0.1, 0.2, 0.4, 0.9, 1.9, 3.8, 7.6, 15.2, 30.4

So seem to be good enough for occasional tweaks instead of replacing whole delay_calc formula.

.. _a bit of HTML/JS: https://github.com/mk-fg/fgtk/blob/master/metrics/d3-line-chart-boilerplate.html
