Blocking DDoS from scraper bots the easy way via HTTP-401 Basic Auth
####################################################################

:date: 2026-05-15 13:02
:tags: sysadmin, web, rate-limiting


Bot traffic on the internet was always comparatively high, with search engine
scrapers and whatever odd research tools doing their thing, but that changed
massively in recent few years with LLM-training-content-scaping bots.

Those don't care about robots.txt and are designed to be unblockable, running on
regular users' machines, faking browser user-agents and doing their thing from a
giant massively-distributed IP pools by now (used to have somewhat blockable net
ranges, but not anymore).

This isn't a big deal for this blog for example, as there're only a few static
pages, which these bots grab and go away reasonably quickly, but for local git
repos this isn't the case - list of commits and various links there is effectively
infinite, and these idiot bots want EVERY-THING!

So what ends up happening is a never-ending stream of requests like this::

  14.243.82.173 - - [15/May/2026:00:50:01 +0500]
    "GET /code/git/.../pa-mixer.example.cfg?id=9537b82b... HTTP/1.1"
    200 3516 "-" "Mozilla/5.0 (Windows NT 10.0; Win64; x64) ... Safari/537.36" ...

With specific bot pool typically doing this for hours or like a day at a time,
sometimes at rates well above 100 requests per second, which is kinda nuts load,
normally only seen by high-traffic commercial sites, not a random self-hosted git repo.

Or it's more like a distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack, where no value
is gained from it (incl. by whatever crap "AI" idiocy behind it), but resources
are knocked off the internet one way or another, presumably with side-benefit
that only way to look something up now will be going to those big-tech scrapers,
for a crappy simulacra of the stuff they destroyed in the process of extraction,
so dunno if DDoS aspect of it will go away anytime soon.

Despite cgit_ that I use being super-efficient and handling the load,
by May 2026 these scrapers even rack up a couple gigabytes of access.log
files per day (!!!), so it got annoying enough for me at this point.

.. _cgit: https://git.zx2c4.com/cgit/about/

------

There are few common ways of dealing with this crap:

- Install Anubis_ tool, which runs a cpu-intensive challenge on clients via JS.
- Set/check a cookie for all clients, e.g. via testcookie-nginx-module_ on HTTP level.
- Detect bots somehow and serve them some "poisoned" content.
- CAPTCHAs from Google/CloudFlare, or generated locally in some fashion.
- Shutdown public access, requiring some auth, and rate-limit accounts/users (e.g. github).

Don't like any JS mechanisms, as I tend to disable/limit it myself, and Anubis
in particular looks a bit too high-maintenance for me, being like a whole complicated
anti-spam system (and those rarely work well).
It's a well-known and very common solution too, likely locked in an arms race
with countermeasures.

Training data "poisoning" is a variation on this, with some extra work towards
making such scraping less lucrative and "fighting back" in a way, with its own
spam-vs-ham arms race on top of bot-detection. Even more high-maintenance.

Simple cookies - if still work - likely have their days numbered as these bots
seem to be well-coordinated and well-funded, so probably advanced enough to do
cookies or maybe some JS nowadays.

So my thinking is to either shut public git down - which is an easy option,
esp. given that I don't really consider myself part of "FOSS community" of any kind,
sharing random projects doesn't benefit me in any meaningful way, and don't think
there's anything of value lost by dropping all that off the internet anyhow.

Or, alternatively, do something trivial low-maintenance that works, and an easy
idea I had is something between remaining CAPTCHA and user authentication
options - to put an HTTP-401 Basic Auth (which all browsers and tools like git
still support thankfully), but only during those bot-onslaught hours every few
days when it gets annoying, and just put login/pw right on http-401 error page
where a human might see it without right credentials.

.. _Anubis: https://anubis.techaro.lol/
.. _testcookie-nginx-module: https://github.com/kyprizel/testcookie-nginx-module

------

First thing I did a while ago is to remove massive access/error logs that
needlessly trash CPU and SSD erase-cycles (and make these logs useless anyway
due to sheer size), starting with \/etc\/fstab::

  tmpfs /run/nginx/temp-logs tmpfs size=50m,nodev,nosuid,uid=nginx,gid=nginx,mode=750

Then put nginx_ info-level ``error_log`` and unfiltered ``access_log`` there,
with separate logrotate-temp-nginx.service having ``size 5M`` + ``rotate 1`` +
SIGUSR1 to nginx, and running often enough to handle high-spam-tides, to have more
than enough logs for any kind of observability/debug purposes.

.. _nginx: https://nginx.org/

This actually doesn't mean that all logs have to go there, as e.g. ``error_log
... warn`` doesn't get spammy from bots, and neither do ``access_log ... if=$log_bot_filter``
if-filtered ones, with ``$log_bot_filter`` set as e.g.::

  map "$status $request" $log_bot_filter {
    "~*301 GET https?:" 0;
    "~*[34]01 GET /code/git/" 0;
    default 1;
  }

(where current bots often send proxy-like bogus full-URL requests,
and 301/401 to git URLs are from bot-storm-auth thing described below)

HTTP Basic Authentication is supported by nginx (or probably any httpd) natively::

  location ~ ^/code/git(/.*)?$ {
    include auth.bots-cgit.inc;
    error_page 401 @bot-401;
    ...<request-handling-options>
  }

  location @bot-401 {
    try_files /bot-401.html =401;
  }

With ``auth.bots-cgit.inc`` something like this::

  auth_basic "Skip auth and read error-401 page";
  auth_basic_user_file auth.bots-cgit.secret;

It's in a separate include-file to be easy to toggle on and off,
as bot tides rise and fall, which can be done via somewhat trivial
cron-check every few dozen minutes:

.. code-block:: bash

  #!/bin/bash
  # log_format temp '$time_iso8601 $status $remote_addr :: $http_host :: $request_uri';
  p_log=/run/nginx/temp-logs/access.log
  rps_ddos=20 # min requests per second to enable http auth

  # Check rotated log as well if new one is small-ish (~170B / line)
  p_log_sz=$(stat -c%s $p_log 2>/dev/null || echo 0)
  if [[ "$p_log_sz" -ge 2000000 || ! -e "$p_log".1 ]]
    then cmd1="tail -qn 9000 $p_log" cmd2=cat
    else cmd1="tail -qn 7000 $p_log.1 $p_log" cmd2='tail -qn 9000'; fi

  read n ts < <( $cmd1 | $cmd2 | awk '
    $NF!~/^\/code\/git/ {next} {n+=1} !ts {ts=$1} END {print n, ts}' )
  [[ -n "$ts" ]] || exit 0 # no matched lines - odd but possible
  rps=$(( $n / ( $(printf '%(%s)T' -1) - $(date +%s -d "$ts") ) ))

  grep -q '^auth_basic' auth.bots-cgit.inc && auth_enabled=1 || auth_enabled=
  if [[ "$rps" -ge "$rps_ddos" ]] # exit if auth_enabled is what it should be
    then [[ -z "$auth_enabled" ]] || exit 0
    else [[ -n "$auth_enabled" ]] || exit 0 ; fi

  # ... otherwise enable/disable lines in auth.bots-cgit.inc and reload nginx config

So that if these spammy bots go away eventually, either temporarily or when
"AI bubble" bursts and operators go bust or maybe make them a bit smarter,
then none of this would be annoying actual users or whatever other more well-behaved
bots during quiet times, but remove or mitigate the need to maintain highload setup
just for bot-nonsense.

One last piece is a trivial bot-401.html placeholder-page and credentials in
``auth.bots-cgit.secret`` file - these don't need to be fancy or secure.
I've ended up making small script to generate and rotate login/pw in these files
on a daily cronjob - nginx-auth-rotate_ - which keeps old auth credentials working
for a while even after new ones are put into secrets/html files.

Actual LLMs can probably be used to read http error-401 pages for such credentials,
but doubt anyone'd bother adding that, if this specific workaround is used sparsely,
and there's an easy fix for that going down the "CAPTCHA" route - put any silly riddle
there that slop-generators will struggle with, like `"how many R letters are in a strawberry"`_ :)

There's probably also a more sophisticated solution that first displays
"use these login/pw" to browsers (humans) without auth or "seen the warning" cookie,
to make such auth look less show-stopper for people who won't read error-401 page,
but that's not a big concern for some random obscure web-git like mine, and doesn't
seem worth bothering with when this basic solution works already.

.. _nginx-auth-rotate: https://github.com/mk-fg/fgtk#hdr-nginx-auth-rotate
.. _"how many R letters are in a strawberry": https://arxiv.org/html/2412.18626v1
