Best multi-rename tool - editing file-list in text $EDITOR
##########################################################

:date: 2026-03-09 09:39
:tags: tools, python, fs


Tools like rnm_ and regex-rename_, or one-liner shell loop like::

  for p in *.mkv; do n=${p##*/}; n=<string-manipulations>...; echo mv "$p" "$n"; done

\.\.\.is how I usually rename stuff, as a typical shell-for-file-management
terminal-user.

It's non-interactive and not "visual", as in you kinda have to imagine results,
then think of all regex-replace manipulations you need to get there, type all
those down, run it, check result, adjust regexps, repeat, ...

This reminds me a lot of how paper-teletype-era "line editors" like ed_ worked,
and there's a good reason why most people use interactive editors for text
manipulation tasks like that by now instead.

So in that spirit, as the need to organize some files arose again, decided to write
a small script to easily delegate mass file/dir renames to an $EDITOR (`emacs in my
case`_) - dir-edit_.

You give it files/paths to use, or just run in whatever dir, and plaintext
filename-per-line list opens, to do all sorts of search-replaces, cut/copy-and-pastes,
multi-cursor edits, minor specific tweaks, etc. Any text editor is great for that.

Tool either waits for $EDITOR to exit, or until file is modified (dir-inotify
triggers for file and contents don't match), then prints a diff of old-to-new
file-list contents, with a prompt to confirm all renames there::

  QUERY: [A]pply changes, [R]eload, call [E]ditor again, [W]ait for more edits, [Q]uit/e[X]it

Unlike with non-interactive tools, you've already seen the results, and done
any number of tweaks/corrections by then, so this is mostly a confirmation step,
in case of any unnoticed editing mishaps.

Files are still checked for name conflicts afterwards (aborting unless
``--replace`` is used), as well as other sanity-checks for recursive renaming
(like missing dst dirs, cross-device renames, etc).

File-list is simply matched line-by-line by default, i.e. new filename is
expected to be on the same line, but other plaintext option is to tag lines with
a small case-insensitive file-id on the right (e.g. ``my file name.txt  #xwz3``,
which allows to reorder or add/remove lines when editing, only picking up names
with those tags intact at the end, which shouldn't be easy to mess-up.

This works great for complicated names of torrented files, which often include
all sorts of information, typically not needed locally after download.

Bonus advantage is that while aforementioned rnm/regex-rename ed/grep/sed-style
tools do present some kind of "old -> new" info before enacting renames,
those never bother to include trickier colorized inline diffs, which fancy diff-tools
like delta_ can easily make (and using "delta" or "colordiff" is picked-up by default
if those are somewhere in $PATH), so it kinda beats those at even non-interactive
"one regexp-tweak at a time" usage.

  Link: `dir-edit script in mk-fg/fgtk repo`_ (github) or `on codeberg`_, `in local git`_.


.. _rnm: https://github.com/neurobin/rnm
.. _regex-rename: https://github.com/igrek51/regex-rename
.. _ed: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ed_(text_editor)
.. _emacs in my case: https://github.com/mk-fg/emacs-setup
.. _dir-edit: https://github.com/mk-fg/fgtk#hdr-dir-edit
.. _delta: https://dandavison.github.io/delta/
.. _dir-edit script in mk-fg/fgtk repo: https://github.com/mk-fg/fgtk#hdr-dir-edit
.. _on codeberg: https://codeberg.org/mk-fg/fgtk#hdr-dir-edit
.. _in local git: https://fraggod.net/code/git/fgtk/about/dir-edit
